---
layout: default
title: Lessons in Software Creation
---

### Lessons in Software Creation

When working as a team it is important to recognise that some of our best
intentions can sometimes lead to counter intuitive results. I have forgotten
some key lessons that highlight pitfalls when creating software.

### 1. The Mythical Man-Month

Not so much forgotten as it is poorly communicated in my case. Internally it
seems apparant that the more authors introduced to a system will encourage
further complexity as implementation details require communication time to sync
correctly. Express this idea to project managers that hang onto the idea that
more people on the task will accelerate progress.

Summarised:
Assigning more programmers to a project running behind schedule will make it
even later.


### 2. Secrecy is the enemy of agility

Related to the communication channels problem described in the mythical man
month is closing the same channels when they are required for the team to have
perspective on the product they are working to create. Managers that take pride
in defending their team from the outside world prevent members from seeing the
change the project may need to address. Goals given without context often fail
to motivate developers as they can't see the problem that is being solved. They
may be tempted to think that the problem doesn't exist at all, that they may not
be able to complete the goal because they do not understand it's purpose.
Secrecy is lying by omission and breeds dishonesty.

Summarised:
Treat your team like adults

### 3. Product Managers are not Development Managers

Micromanagement is an effective way to kill developer productivity. It happens
often when a project starts to slip behind schedule. There are telltale signs
beyond deciding the implementation details for you, notably when a state of
emergency is declared this will be followed by a suspension of regular
development practices. Overuse of ASAP, priority tasks and requiring constant
updates often by interrupting development work to do so.

It is not uncommon for product managers to request breaking changes because
particular tasks are priority or killer features have been promised to clients.

Talking about implementation details is generally a bad sign even when
discussing the feasability of feature requests. This includes asking to reuse
solutions instead of writing something from scratch.

Most points here assume that the developer can't do their own work properly, the
final nail in the coffin is asking them to try again implying that they did not
make proper effort in the first place.

Developers need freedom to work things out, creating software is a creative and
experimental process, often you won't be able to state all requirements upfront.
A major reason why waterfall methodology is considered ineffective on many
projects. Good developers are used to doing necessary, but hard to justify work
'under the radar'. It is far better to give high-level requirements for the
product and let your team work on the result.

Summarised:
Developers are capable of managing their own time.

### 4. Signing features

Promised features to get new customers over the line is a great shortcut for
business development but leaves you with two bad choices. Build the feature that
has not been planned for, under a short deadline or go back to the prospect and
say that you can't do what has been promised! To top it off you will be seen
as the bottleneck. Only preventative measures are adequate in this scenario.

By all means discuss product roadmap with customers, consult the people
responsible for building the product before making any promises.

Summarised:
Sell what you have today, there is a line between selling vision and vaporware.

### 5. Unrecorded distractions

Your work environment has a large impact on how well you can produce software.
Open offices are commonplace and conversation can be distracting. Make sure you
spend sometime working from home or in isolation, even if it's just using
headphones to remove the surrounding noise.

Summarised:
I don't know how to multitask and produce good software. Good environment makes
all the difference.
